Skip to Content AZ Index Bulletin Home MIT Home
A – ZCalendar Archive Print
MIT Bulletin
MIT
Academic Procedures
Home>This Is MIT>Academic Procedures>Academic Performance and Grades
Search the Bulletin...
Submit search
This Is MITToggle This Is MIT
OverviewToggle Overview
Campus LifeToggle Campus Life
Academic ResourcesToggle Academic Resources
Undergraduate EducationToggle Undergraduate Education
Graduate EducationToggle Graduate Education
Academic ProceduresToggle Academic Procedures
Registration
Term Regulations and Examination Policies
Academic Performance and Grades
Graduation
Institute RegulationsToggle Institute Regulations
Research and StudyToggle Research and Study
Schools and CollegeToggle Schools and College
Interdisciplinary ProgramsToggle Interdisciplinary Programs
Degree ChartsToggle Degree Charts
SubjectsToggle Subjects
Academic Performance and Grades
Undergraduate Academic Standards
Graduate Academic Standards
Grades
Grade Reports & Transcripts
Undergraduate Academic Standards
The Committee on Academic Performance (CAP) ensures that the minimum academic standards proposed by the individual departments for undergraduate students are consistent throughout the Institute and conform to the rules and regulations approved by the Faculty. In view of the individual nature of student academic performance, the CAP does not establish rigid standards of academic performance to be used throughout the Institute. The Institute generally expects undergraduate students to complete the requirements for an SB degree in four years; passing an average of 48 units per term for eight terms will accomplish this goal. Normally, however, the CAP accepts a minimum academic record of at least 36 units of credit with a term rating above 3.0 (on a 5.0 scale) at the end of any regular term, unless the Committee has specifically notified an individual student that a higher level of performance is required. (The latter would only occur as a result of previously poor performance.)

When these criteria are not met, the CAP considers each student's academic performance on an individual basis. Consideration is given not only to the grades received in the subjects for which the student is registered, but also to the total number of subject units, the nature of the subjects themselves, progress toward the degree, and personal or medical factors that may have affected academic performance in a given term. The CAP website gives more detailed information concerning end-of-term review procedures. For further information, contact the CAP administrator, Room 7-103, 617-253-4164.

Undergraduate Academic Standards for Federal Student Financial Assistance
Per federal regulations, an undergraduate student is eligible to receive federal student financial assistance if the student is enrolled at least half time per term and maintains satisfactory academic progress in their course of study.

Federal student financial assistance for undergraduates includes: Federal Pell Grants, Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants, Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grants, Federal Direct Subsidized Loans, Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loans, Federal Direct PLUS Loans for Parents, and Federal Work-Study.

An MIT undergraduate must achieve all of the following academic standards to qualify and maintain federal student financial assistance:

Have a cumulative grade point average (GPA) of at least a C (3.0 on MIT’s 5.0 scale)
Pass 67% of cumulative units attempted (defined as “pace”)
Not exceed 150% of the published length of the program
Dropped subjects are not included in the GPA or pace calculations. Transfer credits, which carry no grade, are not included in the GPA calculation, but the number of transfer units a student has is included in the pace calculation. Grades from incomplete units are not included in the GPA calculation, but incomplete units are included in the pace calculation. Grades for repeated units are included in the GPA calculation, but repeated units can only be counted once in the pace calculation.

If a student’s performance falls below any one of the above academic standards, and that student is eligible for federal student financial assistance, the Committee on Academic Performance (CAP) will review the student’s progress at the end of the term. After taking special circumstances into account, the CAP will decide on the appropriate action.

Students on, or eligible for, federal student financial assistance who are placed on academic warning by the CAP are concurrently placed on federal financial aid warning or federal financial aid probation by Student Financial Services (SFS).

Students are put on federal financial aid warning if they were not on academic warning in the prior term, but have been placed on academic warning by the CAP. Students on federal financial aid warning may continue to receive federal student financial assistance for the following term. Federal financial aid warning status has no effect on the amount of financial aid a student is eligible to receive from MIT, the federal government, or any other source during the federal financial aid warning term.
Students are put on federal financial aid probation if they were on academic warning in the prior term and continue to be placed on academic warning by the CAP. Being on federal financial aid probation allows students to retain eligibility for federal financial aid, however, students may only be placed on federal financial aid probation following a successful appeal. At MIT, the CAP review of a student’s academic progress constitutes the required appeal process. Any decision by the CAP other than requiring the student to take an academic leave from MIT constitutes approval of the appeal. Federal financial aid probation status has no effect on the amount of financial aid the student is eligible to receive from MIT, the federal government, or any other source during the federal financial aid probation term.
A student under CAP review will be considered to be making satisfactory academic progress for federal student financial assistance purposes unless the CAP requires the student to take a required academic leave from MIT.

AdmissionsFinancial AidRegistrarIAPSummerProfessional EducationMITxK-12Campus Map
DirectoriesAbout the BulletinNondiscrimination PolicyChangesHelpAccessibility
MIT
MIT Academic Bulletin
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307
Back to top